Post: Civic Square
Location: Civic Square, 33 Livingston Ave, New Brunswick, NJ
Hours: Mission:
1900 to 0000, Monday through Thursday
To provide professional and courteous access control Community Service Officers will provide direct
observation of students, faculty, staff, and visitors of the Civic Square building while protecting the
interests of the university’s community. Community Service Officers will be accomplished by being alert
and vigilant at all times, and by using any and all assets at their disposal. To ensure all parties’ interests
are protected, all CSOs assigned to this post will adhere to the post orders for this post.
Emergency Contact Numbers
Note: Contact for significant building emergencies only and only contact after exhausting the chain
of command.
Civic Square Bldg. Operations Supervisor: Thomas
848-932-2813
Calhoun
RUPD Dispatch (732) 932-7211


Background:
The Civic Square building is an off-campus site located in New Brunswick. The facility is open to all
during the day and requires swipe access for authorized individuals at night. CSOs were assigned to this
post as a response to vandalism in the building and the threat thereof. CSOs will provide a visible and
secure presence inside the building during peak hours and support staff as necessary.
Civic Square houses two distinct populations. On one side of the building is the Bloustein School for
Planning for Public Policy and on the other side is the Mason Gross School of the Arts. Both schools
have different populations with different cultures and needs. CSOs must be courteous, respectful, and
accommodating for both populations.
Reporting for Duty:
● CSOs assigned to this post will read, familiarize and understand the post orders for this post.
They will adhere to the rules and regulations set forth in them.
● CSOs will report to the Civic Square building and be at the post on time.
● Each day, CSOs working this post will read the Civic Square Building Hours document and the
Bloustein School events schedule. The events schedule details all classes and events scheduled
throughout the week and will allow the CSO to provide assistance to visitors of the facility.
● CSOs may park with their personal vehicles in the New Brunswick parking deck, which is
connected on the side of the Civic Square building off of Livingston Ave, without payment while
on official business.
● CSOs should be able to get in and out of the deck without incident. If there are any issues with
parking, CSOs should pay if necessary, and then contact their supervisor the next day. Parking
may be modified in the future if there are issues reported with the New Brunswick parking deck.
● CSOs will report for duty in the uniform of the day.
o Spring/Summer Attire– Class A Uniform: Short sleeve shirt with white T-shirt, pants,
black belt and black boots/shoes.
o Fall/Winter Attire– Class A Uniform: Long sleeve shirt, pants, black belt, and black
boots/shoes.
o CSOs reporting for duty that is not in full uniform will not be allowed to work and will be
subject to disciplinary action


● CSOs will remain at the front desk at all times except when conducting periodic checks of the
facility or taking care of personal business.
● The equipment for this post (binder and radio) are stored in the cabinet in the main desk.
o The key set lock combination is 9813.
● Effective 12/19/2022, the code for the master lock lockbox outside room 101F (Security Office)
at Civic Square will be changed from 3158 to 9551
Assignment Details:
● CSOs will be knowledgeable of the layout of the Civic Square building for both the Bloustein
School and Mason Gross sides of the building. During the periodic patrols of the facility, CSOs
should take the opportunity to become familiar with all sections of the building.
● CSOs assigned to this post will monitor the point(s) of entrance to the Civic Square building and
politely greet and assist all visitors to the building.
● CSOs will provide assistance to students, visitors and Civic Square staff as requested.
● CSOs will perform at least three routine patrols of the building (Bloustein and Civic Square side).
Patrol 1 at 2020 Patrol 2 at 2200 Patrol 2 at 2330 ● Walkthrough of building
● Inspect the stairwell leading to the basement / sub-basement
parking levels to ensure no unauthorized people are occupying the
stairwell or beneath the staircase.
o In the case that the entrance to the stairwell is locked,
CSOs should still look through the door window for any
unauthorized people.
o If unauthorized people are found, the CSO should contact
RUPD dispatch at (732) 932-7211.
● Walkthrough of building
● Ensure staff is not in need of anything
● Walkthrough of building
● Inspect the stairwell leading to the basement / sub basement
parking levels to ensure no unauthorized people are occupying the
stairwell or beneath the staircase.
o In the case that the entrance to the stairwell is locked,
CSOs should still look through the door window for any
unauthorized people.
o If unauthorized people are found, the CSO should contact
RUPD dispatch at (732) 932-7211.


● CSOs should monitor the CCTV systems for the Civic Square building for suspicious activity.
PTZ cameras should not be moved from their home location.
● CSOs will immediately report any suspicious activity observed to RUPD dispatch (732) 932-7211
and then they will advise their immediate supervisor.
● CSOs will report any severe facilities concerns (plumbing issues, or other hazards) to RUPD
dispatch (732) 932-7211. CSOs will answer the desk phone and respond to the best of their
ability, an answer of “I do not know” is acceptable where applicable. If the phone is called and
the caller says “hold all my calls” an emergency situation is in progress and CSOs should
immediately call RUPD dispatch (732) 932-7211.
● CSOs will pay strict attention to their duties and shall not engage in any activity that could
distract them. These activities include unauthorized computer usage, listening to music/iPod,
watching movies/videos, etc.
Potential Issues:
● Alcohol at Events – The Bloustein School hosts a wide variety of events each week. Alcoholic
beverages are permitted to be served at the facility. Students who are obviously not a part of an
official function should not be permitted to drink on the premises and CSOs should respond
appropriately to the situation.
● Concessions for Events – CSOs do not have access to the maintenance closet or to any equipment
for events.
● Room/Studio Lockouts – CSOs do not have access to the Master Keys. The CSO should attempt
to contact RUPD Dispatch to have a Security Officer respond to unlock the room.
● Bike Racks: CSOs should pay particular attention to the bike racks out front and monitor this area
via the CCTV , as bike thefts from these racks are common and occur frequently over the
semester.
End of Shift
● CSOs will make sure that the Lobby Desk is clean, presentable, and that all waste is disposed of
prior to leaving for the evening. The desk is shared with Building Coordinator Thomas Worman
and is his office. Please be respectful of his space and make sure the desk is clear before leaving
for the night.
● CSOs will remain on post until 0000 unless told otherwise.

● CSOs will fill out and complete all paperwork (pay sheet & event log) and return/lock away all
equipment. The pay sheet will be picked up weekly – the CSO does not need to report back to
Public Safety at the conclusion of this shift.
● CSOs that fail to follow the above guidelines can be dismissed from this post, reassigned to
another post, and/or face disciplinary action.