Post Orders:
Knight Mover
Last Updated: August 30, 2023
Location: Hours: Mission: Phone and radio operations are based out of the CSO office.
Transports take place within on-campus locations on the Rutgers New
Brunswick and Piscataway campuses and select off-campus locations. See
the attached map for elaboration on locations.
During the Fall and Spring semesters
Monday-Thursday mornings: 0230-0630 (in service at 0300)
Summer, Winter, and Spring Break hours are usually
Monday night: 2330-0730 Tuesday morning
Tuesday night: 2330-0730 Wednesday morning
Wednesday night: 2330-0730 Thursday morning
Thursday night: 2330-0730 Friday morning
Friday night: 2330-1030 Saturday morning
Saturday evening: 1830-1030 Sunday morning
Sunday evening: 1830-0730 Monday morning
Note that holiday hours are usually different from the above.
Contact a supervisor if you have any questions about special hours for
holidays
Knight Mover is dedicated to providing a high-quality, individualized
transportation service to Rutgers Affiliates. CSOs working Knight Mover
are expected to be courteous and professional to users of the service and
assist, as needed, with transportation needs within the boundaries of the
serviced areas, according to the SOP . In lieu of campus bus services, the
Knight Mover is the official Rutgers transportation service during its
hours of operation.

Quick Reference Guide: Problems
Problem or emergency? Accident? Lost? Need help? Attempt to contact the person below.
If you cannot reach them, try the next person in the list.
Remember: If your emergency is life-threatening or may cause injury, first dial 911
1. On-Duty Security Lt. - Radio 150
2. Knight Mover Company Supervisor CS Samaras 908-692-1332
3. Battalion Supervisor BS Tineo 201-446-5818
4. CSO Security Lt. Lt. Lazzar 848-202-5000
5. RUPD Non-Emergency - 732-932-7211
Quick Reference Guide: Submitting Reports
Handy checklist to ensure you have sent all required reports. Read the SOP for details and
instructions on how to send it.
★ At End of Shift, SA VE (To KM folder) then EMAIL Dispatcher Log Sheet to…
○ dr558@ipo.rutgers.edu
○ tl723@ipo.rutgers.edu
○ tps78@scarletmail.rutgers.edu
○ jijo.tlazzar@rutgers.edu
★ At End of Shift, SCAN then EMAIL (Forward) both V ehicle Inspection Sheets to…
○ dr558@ipo.rutgers.edu
○ tl723@ipo.rutgers.edu
★ IF a vehicle malfunctions / ETOH / MVC / anything unusual:
At End of Shift, EMAIL a description of the problem to…
○ dr558@ipo.rutgers.edu
○ tl723@ipo.rutgers.edu
○ tps78@scarletmail.rutgers.edu
○ jijo.tlazzar@rutgers.edu
○ jst139@scarletmail.rutgers.edu

Start of Shift Procedures:
CSOs will report to their shift 30 minutes before vehicles are to go into service. During this time,
CSO’s should brief in the CSO office and should do the following before going into service:
● Accurately complete a vehicle Inspection Sheet (including oil levels) and make sure
vehicles are fueled adequately.
● Log onto the KM computer: Username: svc_knightmover Password:
Saturday,July112021
● Start a Dispatcher Log sheet, save it as the current date in the completed log sheet folder,
and log necessary information in the Knight Mover log.
● The dispatcher, at the end of his or her shift, should email the completed Log under
the subject “Knight Mover Log Sheet for xx. xx. xxxx (Date).”. Send the email to the
following people:
Assistant Transit Services Manager Domenick Rizzo dr558@ipo.rutgers.edu
Administrative Coordinator Tiffany Lewis tl723@ipo.rutgers.edu
KM Company Supervisor CS Samaras tps78@scarletmail.rutgers.edu
CSO Security Lt. Lt Lazzar jijo.tlazzar@rutgers.edu
● Confirm safe weather conditions before start of service. Please see the “Adverse
Weather” section for more info.
● Confirm operation of radios.
● Calls coming in before Knight Mover goes into service do not need to be picked up.
However, the dispatcher may choose to pick up the call and advise the caller that they
should call back when Knight Mover goes into service. This lessens the call volume for
RUPD Communications, because when the Knight Mover phone goes unanswered, the
caller will oftentimes call RUPD Communications to inquire if Knight Mover is in
service or not. As such, if a call comes in at 0245, when Knight Mover goes in service at
0300, the dispatcher may answer the phone to advise the caller to call back at 0300 or
later.
Radio Operations:

● CSO’s will use plain English transmissions as much as possible and should be familiar
with the following terms: Shuttle 1, Shuttle 2, Received, Affirmed, Negative, Standby,
Clear, Pending Calls, ETOH, In Service, Out of Service, go again, Non-affiliated,
Dispatch, No Show, Over Capacity, Rutgers, as well as any other term deemed necessary
for shift operations.
● CSO’s should make sure that channels are not patched to bus dispatch and should inquire
with an RUPD Communications officer about any immediate issues with the radios.
● Dispatchers should switch to the DOTS 1 channel and scan other channels in order to
maintain awareness of any emergencies going on in those channels.
● Radio transmissions should be as short and efficient as possible, maintaining a
professional demeanor at all times. Longer messages or messages which contain sensitive
information should be transmitted via phone whenever possible.
● In the event that Shuttles 1 and 2 decide to switch pickups based on efficiency, Dispatch
should be notified of the change as soon as possible.
● Drivers should be aware of areas with poor radio reception. Since the radios have been
updated, this is less of an issue than it has been in the past. However, the drivers should
be aware that in certain areas the radios will have longer queue times, and, as a result,
efficient transmissions may be slightly more difficult.
Medical/Emergency Situations on Other Channels:
● In the event that a serious medical emergency occurs on another channel, CSO’s should
attempt to cease radio communication that is not absolutely necessary until the
emergency is cleared.
● Drivers should notify RUPD Communications of ETOH’s or other medical emergencies
on the vehicle. After a medical evaluation of the individual by medical units, the driver
should ensure that there are no bodily fluids present on the vehicle before going back into
service. The on-duty Fire Lieutenant may assist with this search if needed. V ehicles
which are contaminated with bodily fluids from ETOH’s should be placed out of service,
and a supervisor should be notified of the event. If no other vehicles are available, the
CSO should check with the on-duty Security Lieutenant to confirm that the use of vehicle
317 will not conflict with any active transports.
Use of Personal Phones and Bluetooth on Duty:
● In the event that medical emergencies or technological difficulties limit radio
communication, dispatchers may communicate with drivers via personal phones. Drivers
should not answer their phones while the vehicle is moving, should obey all local traffic
laws, and should be aware that cameras on the vehicle may monitor usage of cell phones
in the case that a driver is subject to an internal investigation in regard to illegal phone
usage.
● Use of Bluetooth or hands-free devices is absolutely prohibited by drivers. If a driver is
found to be using such devices on duty, he or she may be immediately disciplined and

have his/her shift revoked. Dispatchers may use a headset to maintain radio
communications if they wish to do so but should make sure that the headset does not
interfere with the ability to answer phone calls.
Taking Phone Calls:
● Dispatchers should answer the phone with the following phrase: “Knight Mover, what is
your location” or “Knight Mover.”
● Dispatchers should retrieve the pickup location, drop-off location, and number of
passengers requesting transport from each caller. After procuring this information, the
dispatcher should advise the caller to wait outside with their Rutgers ID. If there are no
other calls waiting on the line, the dispatcher should ask if the caller is currently waiting
outside at the time. This helps to prevent no shows, as many callers call for a transport
while they are not waiting outside.
● CSO’s shall not provide time estimates or the location of the vehicle to callers. The sole
exception to this is when the caller calls for a location where the vehicle is already
present. In this case, the dispatcher may advise the caller that the vehicle is currently
waiting at that location or near that location and should inquire if the caller can make it
out to the stop within a minute or two. In this case, the driver does not have to standby
waiting for the caller if he or she has other callers to pick up.
● When multiple calls come in simultaneously, the dispatcher should place the first call on
hold and take down the second call’s info before returning to the first caller. When three
or more calls come in simultaneously, the third call and up will automatically be
transferred to RUPD Communications. RUPD Communications officers will notify the
caller to call back in a few minutes or will transfer the call back to the Knight Mover line.
Adverse Weather Procedures:
● In the event that the weather causes poor road conditions, the dispatcher should contact
the on-duty Security Lieutenant if available. If he or she is not available, the RUPD road
Sergeant can be contacted for an evaluation of road conditions. They can be located in the
basement. If it is found that road conditions are dangerous, current pending calls should
be completed only if it is safe to do so. After Knight Mover is closed down, callers
should be advised that Knight Mover is not in service. Attached to this SOP are phone
numbers for local taxi companies that can assist callers in transport if Knight Mover
operations are shut down.
● If Knight Mover is shut down, the dispatcher should also log the out of service status
with a time stamp in the “Time Received” column and an “L” symbol under the
disposition referring to check the log book. A brief narrative noting the time that Knight
Mover went out of service and by what authority should be noted in the log book.
● In the case that Knight Mover is shut down in advance by the Department of
Transportation or full-time staff for the entirety of the shift, only the dispatcher should
report to shift to take calls and advise any callers that the service is not operating.

Serviceable Areas:
● The mission of Knight Mover is to provide safe transport to Rutgers affiliates to all
on-campus locations, including RBHS facilities. Pickups on Cook/Douglass should never
extend below RT. 1. Pickups at Rutgers buildings which are far off campus may be
restricted at the discretion of the dispatcher. This discretion should be based on weather
conditions, how busy we are, and if the caller feels unsafe. Callers may be asked to walk
to an easier location for pick-up such as the George & Paterson bus stop instead of the
School of Nursing. If the caller feels unsafe walking from that Rutgers building to a more
convenient location, or if weather conditions make it very difficult to do so, the
dispatcher should dispatch the driver out to the original location. This discretion does not
extend to off-campus locations except those which DOTS has permitted passenger
pickups.
● Off-campus areas serviced are limited to: George & Paterson, George & Liberty, New
Brunswick Train Station (Somerset St, Albany St. and George St. sides), Robert Wood
Johnson Hospital, St. Peters Hospital, and the SoCam Apartments. Civic Square and the
School of Nursing are considered to be on-campus buildings. Knight Mover staff have
the responsibility to service these locations as well as on campus locations. Calls from
outside these borders (Louis St, Jones Ave, ETC.) should be advised to walk to the
nearest pickup location and to call back when they are waiting outside at that location.
● Avoid tighter side streets such as Mine St. and Union St.
● For more details on exact on-campus and off-campus pickup locations, please see the
official Knight Mover coverage map at the end of SOP .
Prohibited Areas:
CSO’s are prohibited from driving the vehicles through the following areas:
● Delevan Street
● Any other area which the driver feels is unsafe to drive through.
o This could include, but is not limited to, the emergency entrance to St. Peters
where heavy vehicular traffic may render it unsafe to drive through, and other
areas where the overhead clearance is under the height of the vehicle.
● In the event that a dangerous situation is heard over the radio, drivers should avoid the
area. EX: Domestic Violence, Assault, Use of CDS, Robbery, etc. Dispatchers may be
advised of events heard over New Brunswick Police by an RUPD Communications
Officer; if this is the case, this information may be related to drivers, if necessary, to
avoid that area.
In the case that Knight Mover is shut-down mid shift due to adverse weather conditions, or in
the case that vehicles are still in service pending a road evaluation drivers should be aware of
the following areas which may become very dangerous in bad weather:

● Carman Street between George Street and Neilson Street
● Neilson Street between New Street and Bishop Street
● The Livingston Circle off of Avenue E
● Easton Avenue between Route 27 and Somerset Street
● Route 18 bridge going over the Raritan River
End of Shift Procedures:
Dispatchers should discontinue logging new calls 15 minutes before the scheduled end time of
the shift.
● Calls after this time should be advised that Knight Mover is out of service, and that they
should make their way to a campus bus stop to wait for the campus buses to go into
service. Callers which have previously no-showed who call back after we stop taking
calls should also be advised to wait for the campus buses.
● V ehicles should be parked where they were found at the beginning of the shift.
● Once all calls have a cleared disposition, the Knight Mover Dispatcher Log should
be saved to the Knight Mover Log folder and subsequently emailed to:
Assistant Transit Services Manager Dominick Rizzo dr558@ipo.rutgers.edu
Administrative Coordinator Tiffany Lewis tl723@ipo.rutgers.edu
KM Company Supervisor CS Samaras tps78@scarletmail.rutgers.edu
● Drivers should conduct a post-trip vehicle inspection and upon returning to the office,
scan and send a copy of both inspection sheets to Dominick Rizzo and Tiffany Lewis
using the office scanner.
● If anything occurred during the shift which is outside of the span of normal shift
operations such as MVC’s, ETOH’s, or mechanical issues, this information should be
emailed to:
Assistant Transit Services Manager Dominick Rizzo dr558@ipo.rutgers.edu
Transportation Tiffany Lewis tl723@ipo.rutgers.edu
Company Supervisor CS Samaras tps78@scarletmail.rutgers.edu
CSO Security Lt. Lt Lazzar jijo.tlazzar@rutgers.edu
Battalion Supervisor BS Tineo jst139@scarletmail.rutgers.edu

● All vehicles should be left with at least a half tank of fuel by the end of the shift before
being placed out of service. Refuels should be completed during the time that the vehicles
are still in service. Fuel time, amount of gas, and current mileage should be noted on the
inspection sheet, and the dispatcher should be advised of the same.
● If a refuel is needed after the conclusion of shift, the driver should attempt to have the
vehicle parked within 30 minutes of the expected end time of shift. If the shift runs 30
minutes over the expected end time, then the dispatcher should notify a supervisor of the
reason why the shift ran late.
● Dispatchers should close out of all open programs and log off of the Knight Mover
computer at the conclusion of their shift.
Safety Issues:
● While making pickups, CSO’s may refuse service to individuals who come onto the
vehicle with dangerous items. These items include: bicycles, scooters, large metal
objects, weapons, open containers of alcohol, highly flammable materials such as
containers of gasoline or lighter fluid, excess luggage, and any other item deemed
dangerous or inappropriate at the discretion of the driver.
● All passengers are to wear seat belts and remain seated at all times.
● If an individual refuse to leave the vehicle, RUPD Communications should be notified so
that an officer can be dispatched.
● The CSO should never make a transport with more passengers in the vehicle than legally
permitted. I.e. all passengers should have one seat they are able to sit in.
Use of Fleet Vehicles:
● Please call 150 to utilize 317 if any of the vehicles need to be taken out of service due to
difficulties.
● During snow days the vans may be moved to Lot 105 instead of Berrue Circle
● The vehicles must not proceed to the Busch Garage if any of them need to be towed.
Inform 150 that they should head to Berrue Circle. After then, describe the problem in an
email to:
Assistant Transit Services Manager Dominick Rizzo dr558@ipo.rutgers.edu
Administrative Coordinator Tiffany Lewis tl723@ipo.rutgers.edu
KM Company Supervisor CS Samaras tps78@scarletmail.rutgers.edu
CSO Security Lt. Lt Lazzar jijo.tlazzar@rutgers.edu

Battalion Supervisor BS Tineo jst139@scarletmail.rutgers.edu
Use of Vehicles and Vehicle Inspection:
⮚ DOTS V ehicle 9755
⮚ DOTS V ehicle 10016
⮚ CSO V an 317
● Drivers should, at the beginning of their shift AND at the end of their shift, perform a
vehicle inspection, noting any damages or missing equipment. Drivers are required to
check the tires and the oil during each shift.
● Any damage which is questionably new should still be reported. These inspection sheets
must be scanned and sent to Dominick Rizzo and Tiffany Lewis using the office scanner
at the end of the shift.
● V ehicles should not be idled for periods over 5 minutes as per DOTS and state vehicle
idling regulations.
● Headlights should be on at all times, per department policy.
● Refuels may be completed on Busch Campus across from Emergency Services or on
Cook Campus off of College Farm Rd. Refuel info should be sent to the dispatcher via
phone or radio and be logged into the Knight Mover Log with the refuel time, amount of
fuel, and mileage of the vehicle. All vehicles must be refueled with gasoline.
● During winter weather, the vehicles may be in the back of Lot 105 on Livingston.
Courtesy and Professionalism:
● CSO’s should keep a professional demeanor at all times over radio and phone
communications.
● Passengers who are irate to the driver, dispatcher, or other passengers may be warned to
stop their behavior and eventually refused service.
● If a person “No-Shows” three (3) times, the driver or dispatcher may refuse service.
● Confidential information heard in RUPD Communications should not be relayed,
recorded, or discussed except for approved official purposes.
Accidents:
● Any Motor V ehicle Collision involving an APS or DOTS vehicle must be reported to
RUPD Communications immediately, and a police report must be taken. V ehicles should
not be moved from the scene of the accident until cleared to do so by the responding
officer. A supervisor must be advised of the incident and a narrative must be written in
the Knight Mover log.

● If the driver comes across a disabled motor vehicle or a Motor V ehicle Collision not
involving the vehicle, the driver should relay the information to RUPD - (732-932-7211).
The driver should not stop on Route 18 unless it is determined to be absolutely necessary
at the discretion of the driver.
● Any assistance given to owners of disabled motor vehicles should only be done if it is
safe to do so.
Taking Complaints:
● If a caller wishes to file a complaint regarding the quality of service, the caller may
transfer the office phone of the CSO Division Supervisor. (848-932-4939) to leave a
message.
● Complaints specifically regarding changes to off campus areas of service should be
forwarded to the office phone of Transit Services Assistant Director John Karakaglou.
(848) 932-4805.
Training Procedures for Supervisors:
● Supervisors training CSOs in dispatch procedures should review these SOP’s thoroughly
with trainees.
● Supervisors should make sure trainees are proficient in communicating over the radio,
taking phone calls, and exhibiting professionalism and a good work ethic
Contact Information:
Victory Taxi 732-545-6666
All-Brunswick Taxi 732-545-0900
RUPD Communications 732-932-7211
KM Company Supervisor: CS Samaras 908-692-1332
Battalion Supervisor: BS Tineo 201-446-5818
Security Supervisor: Lt. Lazzar (Work Mobile) 848-202-5000
Additional Notes:
● In the event that any of the following occurs, the above supervisors should be contacted
and advised of the situation:

o Motor vehicle collisions involving the vehicle, any mechanical issue which
renders a vehicle out of service, ETOH’s, if Knight Mover is shut-down due to
adverse weather, or any other instance where it is reasonably certain that a
supervisor should be advised of an occurrence.
● Rutgers affiliates are defined as Rutgers students, faculty, or staff with a valid Rutgers ID.
Alumni who present an Alumni Card should not be transported, as they are not covered
under Rutgers insurance policy. For those without a valid ID, a valid student who already
presented an ID may claim them as a guest but will accept full liability should an incident
occur.