Post: Overnight Patrol
Location: Rutgers University New Brunswick College Ave campus, New
Brunswick NJ 08901
Hours: 2300 to 0300, Thursday - Sunday
Mission: CSO mission is to provide assistance to RUPD by conducting nightly patrols in specific
area(s) of assignment at Rutgers University. Community Service Officers will provide professional,
courteous service with a uniformed physical presence and direct observation of all University facilities,
Faculty, Staff, Students and Guests. They will protect the interests of the university’s community. This
will be accomplished by CSOs being alert and vigilant at all times, and by utilizing any and all assets at
their disposal. CSO will keep in mind their mission purpose which is: TO OBSERVE AND REPORT,
render assistance when necessary, and to ensure all parties’ interests are protected.
Reporting for Duty:
■ CSO assigned to this post will read, familiarize, and understand the post orders for this post.
o They will adhere to the rules and regulations set forth in them.
■ CSO will report to PSB in the CSO Office on time.
■ CSO will report for duty in the uniform of the day.
o Spring/Summer Attire – Class A Uniform: Short sleeve shirt with white T-shirt, pants,
black belt, and black boots/shoes.
o Fall/Winter Attire – Class A Uniform: Long sleeve shirt, tie, pants, black belt, skull cap,
and black boots/shoes.
■ CSOs will not carry on their person or bring to shift any weapons, including but not limited to:
o knives, pepper spray, collapsible batons, and handcuffs.
■ CSO reporting for duty that is not in full uniform may not be allowed to work at the discretion
of the OIC or 150, and will be subject to disciplinary action.
■ CSOs will be briefed by 150 at the beginning of the shift regarding vehicle(s) allotted and
any specific patrol priorities.
■ CSOs will take out any and all necessary post equipment from the CSO office: Radio, reflective
vest, medical gloves, rain gear, winter jacket, patrol sheet, etc.
■ CSOs working this shift should familiarize themselves and be confident in procedures
regarding ETOH incidents, physical and verbal altercations and MVCs.
■ CSOs working this shift should familiarize themselves with proper radio etiquette.
■ CSOs should familiarize themselves with the geography surrounding the patrol routes
including street names, buildings, and other major landmarks.
o 1 unit will be on the south side of College Ave ending at Hamilton Street, patrolling
around The Y ard Apartments. This unit will remain within the boundaries of
Hamilton Street, Union Street, Mine Street, and College Avenue, paying special
attention to The Y ard bus stop and large gatherings on Union Street.
o 1 unit will be on the northside of College Ave ending at Senior St, patrolling
around the College Avenue Student Center. This unit will remain within the
boundaries of Senior Street, College Avenue, Bartlett Street, and Sicard Street.
o 1 unit will be on the “Supervisor Loop” and will remain on College Avenue unless:
• Performing a suspicious check on an individual who can be seen from
College Ave (Ex. Someone in Voorhees Mall or in the Bishop Quads who
is clearly in need of assistance)
• Performing a suspicious check on an individual who was reported to be
somewhere near but not on College Ave. (Ex. A student reports to the
CSOs that someone was vomiting in the Bishop Quads)
• An active situation over the radio near College Ave requires further
investigation by CSOs (Ex. a BOLO seen running through Voorhees
Mall)
• 150 or a PD supervisor specifically requests that CSOs patrol a certain
area. If a PD supervisor requests reassignment, the CSO OIC must
contact 150 to make notification of the change. (Ex. Repeated graffiti in
Voorhees Mall, 150 requests CSOs should include Voorhees Mall in the
Supervisor Loop that night)
o Overnight patrols that do not include full staffing will be up to the discretion of
the CSO OIC. With less than six CSOs, one unit should be on the south loop and
one unit should be on the north loop. Both loops should increase their College
Avenue patrol to Seminary Place only (remaining on College Ave), then turn back
and continue the loop as described above.
■ CSO OIC will turn in a completed patrol sheet to RUPD dispatch before going on the road.
■ CSO will stay in contact with RUPD at all times either by radio or by phone.
On Patrol:
■ CSOs will conduct their patrols in a professional and visible manner.
■ V ests will be worn at all times and CSOs should spend most of their time outside walking,
weather permitting.
■ CSOs will keep their radio at a volume audible to them at all times as well as pay close attention
to transmissions over all channels. CSOs will act accordingly when officer safety and BOLO
announcements are made over the air in order to remain safe.
■ CSOs may utilize the restrooms within the Rutgers Student Center or Sojourner Truth
Apartments whenever necessary, as long as it does not disrupt a reported event in progress.
o CSOs should communicate their whereabouts to the CSO OIC, but do not need
permission to utilize the restroom.
o If the closest building with a restroom to the unit’s location is not open, CSO will contact
either the OIC for a transport to another bathroom or the on-duty SO on College Ave to open
a building.
■ CSO will NOT engage in any activities that will draw their attention away from their duties: Cell
phone usage (except in an emergency), texting, emailing, or any other activities.
■ CSO will try to be as inconspicuous as possible when reporting an incident.
■ CSO will monitor the activities in and around every facility in their assigned area(s), being
extremely watchful for any suspicious activities or item(s).
■ CSO will, upon identifying suspicious activities or item(s), take the appropriate actions
and advise RUPD dispatch.
o In the event of uncertainty, CSO will make contact with the OIC for further guidance.
■ CSO will report suspicious activities and item(s) from an inconspicuous and safe distance.
■ CSO will NOT approach, confront or attempt to detain any suspicious person.
■ CSO will NOT handle any suspicious item(s).
■ CSO will note their observations in their notebooks/pad and be ready to relay them to RUPD
when they report the incident.
■ CSO will provide the following info to RUPD dispatch when reporting an incident: Who, What,
Where, When and How.
■ CSO will meet and pass on to the RUPD responding officer all pertinent info regarding
the incident.
■ CSO will move to a safe and adjacent area but be ready to respond if requested to do so by RUPD.
■ CSO will render medical assistance consistent within the scope of a Community Service Officer
when necessary.
■ CSO will fill out a patrol sheet for each tour and CAD number when applicable.
■ CSO will close all propped doors of Rutgers buildings
.
End of shift
■ CSOs will return to PSB, turn in their equipment, and fill out the appropriate paperwork.
■ CSOs will be prepared for a debriefing by 150 or CSO OIC.