Post: Public Safety Lobby
Location: Public Safety Building, 55 Paul Robeson Blvd., New Brunswick NJ 08901
Hours : 0800 to 1230, 1230-1700, Monday through Friday
Mission: CSO mission is to provide professional, courteous service, a uniformed physical presence,
and direct observation of all University facilities, Faculty, Staff, Students, and Guests. They will protect
the interests of the university while performing access control and CCTV monitoring duties. This will be
accomplished by CSO being always alert and vigilant and by utilizing any and all assets at their disposal.
CSO will keep in mind their mission purpose which is: TO OBSERVE AND REPORT, render assistance
if necessary and to ensure all parties’ rights and interests are protected.
Instructions :
• CSO assigned to this post will read and familiarize themselves with the post orders for this post.
They will adhere to the rules and regulations set forth in them.
• CSO will report to the Public Safety Building CSO Office on time.
• CSO will report for duty in the uniform of the day.
o Spring/Summer Attire – Class A Uniform: Short sleeve shirt with white under T-shirt,
pants, black belt, and black boots/shoes .
o Fall/Winter Attire – Class A Uniform: Long sleeve shirt with white under T-shirt, pants,
black belt, and black boots/shoes .
o CSO reporting for duty that is not in full uniform will not be allowed to work and will be
subject to disciplinary action.
• CSO will report to the CSO Office prior to taking post at the front lobby desk to obtain all
equipment needed for shift.
• CSO working Monday morning should gather equipment for shift and promptly leave utilizing
an available CSO vehicle to pick up paperwork from all exterior posts (Sec Tech and Civic
Square).
• Upon entering the lobby at the start of the shift, CSO is to turn on the necessary computer
systems (PELCO 1-A, 1-B, 2-A) for the shift. During the duration of the shift, the CSO is to keep 
the left cabinet door open for each computer system to ensure proper airflow. These doors should
be closed when the CSO leaves the lobby for any reason.
o The computer password for the CSO username is Rutgers2016
o PELCO 1-A is on the administrative login and does not need a password.
• Once a shift the CSO will complete the following:
o CSO will take daily inventory of the equipment in the CSO office utilizing the hard copy
before returning to the lobby to enter the data electronically and then destroy the hard
copy.
▪ Reflective vests do NOT need to be inventoried, only Winter Jackets, Rain Cap
Covers, and Rain Coats.
▪ The link to electronically submit data can be found on the hard copy or accessed
through the following link:
• https://forms.gle/hUAfNMhc7roABYxG6
o CSO will take inventory of radios and batteries on Monday and Friday of every week.
Radio inventory sheets are located next to the radios and should be stapled to the back of
the completed assignment sheet.
o CSO will check “Statistics” cubby for any statistics that need to be entered online.
▪ CSO will bring paperwork to the lobby to enter the information.
▪ CSO will then add totals from each daily assignment sheet to the corresponding
boxes found on the last tab of the current CSO Master Schedule Spreadsheet
labeled “Stats.”
• Do NOT overwrite the current number, only add to it.
• Ex: +=1+2+3+4+5+ ___ (you double click and add)
▪ CSO will initial all paperwork done inside the Sheet Review box next to
“Statistics:”.
▪ After statistics are completed, paperwork can be put away in the “Review” cubby.
▪ For a demonstration, please see the “PSB Lobby Paperwork” video in the “Sakai
Files” Google folder. The video is located under the “Reference Materials” folder.
o CSO will check “File” cubby for any paperwork to be put away.
▪ CSO will file paperwork in the second drawer of the filing cabinet next to the
Radio Locker.
▪ Paperwork gets put inside the corresponding month and shift folders in
chronological order according to date .
• CSO assigned to this post will meet and greet all visitors to the Public Safety Building and assist
visitors and departmental personnel necessary. CSO will lift his or her head up when
personnel passes through the lobby to greet them.
• CSO will not allow any unauthorized individuals to access this facility. At this time, the front
and back doors will be locked, and entry into the building will require swipe access.
o CSO will attempt to contact the person(s) being visited via phone or radio to advise them
that they have a visitor. If contact isn’t made the CSO will note the info and pass it on to


the person(s) when time permits. CSO will not let anyone inside the building without
swipe access, they will ask the visitor to wait outside.
o CSO will meet deliverers at the front or back doors and retrieve packages. CSO will
attempt to make contact with the intended recipient, first via phone call utilizing the
extensions in the back of the PSB Lobby binder. If unsuccessful, CSO will look up the
recipient via the Rutgers Directory (accessed by searching for “Rutgers Directory” on
Google) and send an email stating that a package has arrived for them and that the
package will be located in the CSO office after the end of that day. If no one claims the
package by 1700, CSO will leave the package in the CSO office and notify the next CSO
working PSB Lobby of the package, who will again attempt contact. CSOs should pass
information in this pattern until the package is delivered.
• CSO will always monitor the CCTV while on post. First CSO on post on Monday,
Wednesday, and Friday will complete diagnostics for Busch / Livingston, 2 nd CSO on post
will complete diagnostics of both Cook/Douglass and College Avenue. See the end section of
this SOP labeled “CCTV Operations” for further details.
o Upon conclusion of the diagnostics of all campuses, the form should be saved and sent to
Lt. Lazzar at jijo.tlazzar@rutgers.edu and BS Tineo at jst139@scarletmail.rutgers.edu
o Any issues completing the CCTV check by the end of the day should be reported to your
supervisor.
o CSO will turn off the monitors and close the cabinet doors if they are to leave the lobby
for any reason.
o CSO will focus a CCTV camera on a particular location if instructed to do so by
supervisory personnel or if suspicious activity is observed.
o If no priority is given, CSOs should monitor all areas throughout their designated
campuses and report suspicious activity immediately to RUPD Dispatch. CSO will mark
faulty cameras on diagnostics reports.
o CSOs monitoring cameras will not view RUPD LOCKUP ROOM OR CASHIER
AREAS unless it is requested by their supervisor, designate, or police supervisory
personnel.
• CSO will pay strict attention to their duties and shall not engage in any activity that could distract
them.
• CSO may be assigned projects to assist with the functioning of the CSO Division, RUPD, or
Administration & Public Safety. Any project requested by anyone other than the CSO’s
supervisor must be confirmed with the Division Supervisor before beginning the assignment.
• CSO will report any and all suspicious people and packages to RUPD dispatch and Division
Supervisor.
• CSO will be careful not to touch any suspicious packages or item(s). The Grounds Division
phone number: 5- 1234 or facilities 2-5501.
• CSO will remain on post until properly relieved. Relief should be briefed on any pertinent
information.
• CSO will notify his or her supervisor prior to leaving their post for breaks.


End of Shift:
• At the end of the shift, CSO is to completely shut down the computer systems and close the
cabinet doors.
• CSO will fill out and complete all paperwork prior to leaving for the day.
• CSO will NOT leave their post without being properly relieved.
• CSO that fails to follow the above guidelines can be dismissed from this post, be reassigned to
another post and face disciplinary action.
Frequent Concerns:
CSOs will engage every visitor to the Public Safety Lobby in a courteous and friendly manner. Below is
a list of the most common inquiries from visitors to the facility, and the appropriate direction:
• Appeal of Ticket – CSO will politely inform the visitor that appeals can only be completed
online. The CSO will refer the visitor to the Rutgers DOTS website for more information
regarding operations.
• Payment of Ticket – CSO will politely inform the visitor that payments can only be made
online. The CSO will refer the visitor to the Rutgers DOTS website for more information
regarding operations.
• CCTV Issues: CSO will report any problems with the CCTV (PELCO) system. Immediate
concerns should be directed to their supervisor, all other concerns can be included in the email
with the log sheet for the day.
• Lost & Found: See the below steps for a lost and found visitor:
o Ask the visitor if they were contacted to pick up their item.
▪ If they were contacted, contact Emmanuel Perez or the Detective Bureau with the
visitor’s name and lost item type.
▪ If they were not contacted, search the lost and found database for their item using
the person’s description of the item and date it was lost. If a corresponding item is
listed, contact Emmanuel Perez with the item case number, description of the item,
and name of the individual. If the corresponding item is not listed, politely inform
the visitor that we do not have an item matching the description of their item, and
to check back later via the database.
• The database can be found by typing “Rutgers Lost and Found Database”
into the search engine, or by using the following link:
• https://psapp.ipo.rutgers.edu/lostandfound/lostandfound1.aspx
o CSO will allow visitor to enter while contact is made with Emmanuel Perez by
encouraging them to sit on the benches located by the rear of the lobby near the door to
exit toward the CSO office.
o Contact Emmanuel Perez via cell phone (732-850-5418). See the Lost & Found reference
sheet for further.


• Police Issues – CSO will attempt to contact the respective officer or Detective Bureau (if
appropriate). Otherwise, the visitor may enter the building and may consult with the RUPD
Communications Window.
• Police Report/Background Investigations – CSO will allow the visitor to enter and consult
with RUPD Communications Window.
• Police Report Pick Up - CSO will allow the visitor to enter and consult with the Records
Window.
• Purchase of Parking Permit – CSO will inform visitor that purchases can only be made online.
• Suspicious Activity - CSO will immediately report any suspicious activity observed to RUPD
dispatch and notify their supervisor.
• Towed Vehicle – CSO will let the visitor in and refer them to the RUPD Dispatch window. The
CSO will observe the visitor while inside PSB and ensure the visitor leaves when finished with
Dispatch.
• Fire Permits – CSO will ask the visitor to leave forms with CSO and attempt to drop off in the
mailbox located on the third floor.


CCTV Operations:
The PSB Lobby CSO will conduct a thorough examination of the CCTV systems three times a week
utilizing the CCTV evaluation form located on the PSB lobby computers. The steps below should be
followed for a proper diagnostic check:
● Turn on all three computers, keeping the left cabinet door open for computer airflow. The 2 nd and
3 rd computers contain the necessary programs for the diagnostics check. The password for
computers 2 and 3 is Rutgers2016
● Open the CCTV diagnostics form on computer 2 and immediately “Save As” in the proper folder to
avoid overwriting the original form. The folders are organized by month and year (Ex. Diagnostics
reports from the month of May 2023 should be saved in the May 2023 folder). The document
should be labeled “MM-DD-YY - LastName/LastName” (Example: if CS Samaras worked the
morning shift and BS Tineo worked the afternoon shift on May 5, 2023, the form would be labelled
“05-05-23 - Samaras/Tineo”).
● To perform diagnostics on a building server, open the program DS ControlPoint on computer 3.
Double click on the name of the building to connect it individually. Or, single click on a building to
highlight it, then hold shift and click the name of a building a few names down the list. This will
highlight multiple systems at once. Once highlighted, right click and select “Connect.” The bubble
next to the name of the building should change color; yellow means it is attempting to connect,
green means the connection was successful, and yellow then red means the connection was
unsuccessful.
● To view the cameras for each building’s system, click ‘Live’ at the top of the screen. Then, click
and drag the name of the building system from the left side bar onto the blank boxes. This will pull
up all of the cameras for that particular building’s server.
o Note: it is not recommended to connect more than 10 systems at one time, and the systems
should be disconnected (right click on the building system name on the left sidebar and
select “Disconnect”) when the diagnosis of that system is completed. This will allow the
computer to run smoother and connect the next systems faster.
● The CSO should check for any issues with the systems and cameras within them, and note the
appropriate issue on the diagnostic report when applicable.
Common diagnostic issues include:
● A blue screen with “no video” or “lost connection.”
● Screens that flicker on and off.
● Servers which will not connect at all.
o If a server will not connect, the CSO should retry by attempting to connect two or three
times before noting it as a diagnostic issue. Oftentimes, the computer will run out of
memory and the server will not connect as a result. This is not an issue with the cameras
themselves and thus should not be noted as such.
o The server should be noted as not connected, the cameras within do not have to be noted
individually.
● Blurred screens


o This is an issue which should only be reported when the blurring appears to be mechanical.
Often the cameras may appear to be blurred as a result of surrounding lighting. If a camera
continues to go in and out of focus the problem should be noted on the diagnostics report.
● Any camera designated as a license plate reader camera may highlight reflective objects, such as
license plates. This is normal and should not be reported as an issue.
Other notes about DS ControlPoint:
● The CCTV Diagnostic Report is available on Computer 2 and should be saved on Computer 2. A
blank version of the sheet is also available in the “Sakai Files” Google folder under the
“Administrative Docs” and “Shift Sheets” folders.
● Should a CSO move any PTZ camera to monitor activity or to scan the area, the camera must be
moved back to the angle at which the CSO originally found it at the conclusion of their use.
● CSO will report any suspicious activity or person(s) observed to RUPD dispatch and note in detail
on the log sheet. Should a CSO feel that any observation requires attention, the CSO should calmly
and quickly walk to the RUPD dispatch window and immediately notify an RUPD officer, giving
them any and all pertinent details to what they witnessed on the CCTV footage, including location,
possible persons, vehicles, etc.
● If an officer requests assistance accessing archived footage, the CSO should first identify which
cameras may have witnessed the activity in question.
o The building servers of each of these cameras should be logged into so that they may be
accessed by the systems tab on the left-hand side of the screen.
o After identifying the time the activity or event that the officer is looking for was expected to
occur, the CSO should click the search icon (the set of binoculars on the top left hand side
of the screen) and conduct a basic search.
● Conducting a basic search requires an individual camera to be dragged and dropped from the
systems tab into the search tab.
o Once a camera is selected the CSO should enter the time which the activity was expected to
occur and click the “Next” button. The program will then start displaying the video footage
from that time period.
o Basic controls below the camera screen may be used to pause, fast-forward, or perform any
other needed action.
● Pan-tilt-zoom (PTZ) cameras should be used as often as possible when viewing high-traffic or
targeted areas.
o Not all cameras marked PTZ can be manually controlled.
o Those that can’t be manually controlled are set on an automatic Pan-Tilt-Zoom cycle.
o If archived footage is needed from one of these cameras it may be difficult to obtain in a
specific area because of the constant camera movement.
● The CSO should not attempt to access any alarms with the DS ControlPoint servers. Any issues
with building alarms should be forwarded to an RUPD dispatcher.
● The CSO should close out of DS ControlPoint upon completion of his or her shift.